README.md, before:

# London Bioinformatics Frontiers Hackathon Tutorial
Tutorial for The [London Bioinformatics Frontiers](http://bioinformatics-frontiers.com) Hackathon 2019.

![lbf_banner](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/lbf_banner.png)

Intro to:
- [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) - framework for building paralleisable & scalable computational pipelines
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) - tool to create, deploy, and run applications by using containers which bundle dependencies
- [FlowCraft](https://flowcraft.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) - modular, extensible and flexible tool to build, monitor and report nextflow pipelines
- [Deploit](https://lifebit.ai/deploit) - cloud based platform to run Nextflow data analyses & data management

## Prerequisites
The following are required for the hackathon:
- Java 8 or later
- Docker engine 1.10.x (or higher)
- Git
- Python3

*If you have them installed that's great! Don't worry if not we will help you to install them & other software throughout the tutorial*

<br />

## Session 1: Nextflow

![nextflow_logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/nextflow.png)

What is Nextflow? Why use it? [See about Nextflow slides]()

During the first session you will build a [FastQC](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) & [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/)   pipeline to learn the basics of Nextflow including:
- [Parameters](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html?highlight=parameters#pipeline-parameters)
- [Processes](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html) (inputs, outputs & scripts)
- [Channels](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html)
- [Operators](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html)
- [Configuration](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/config.html)


### a) Installation
### i. Installing Nextflow
You will need to have Java 8 or later installed for Nextflow to work. You can check your version of Java by entering the following command:
```bash
java -version
```

To install Nextflow open a terminal & enter the following command:
```bash
curl -fsSL get.nextflow.io | bash
```

This will create a `nextflow` executable file in your current directory. To complete the installation so that you can run Nextflow run anywhere you may want to add it a directory in your $PATH, eg:
```
mv nextflow /usr/local/bin
```

You can then test your installation of Nextflow with:
```
nextflow run hello
```

### ii. Installing Docker

To check if you have docker installed you can type:
```bash
docker -v
```

If you need to install docker you can do so by following the instructions [here](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/). Be sure to select your correct OS:
[![install_docker](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/install_docker.png)](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/)

  
### b) Parameters

Now that we have Nextflow & Docker installed we're ready to run our first script

1. Create a file `main.nf` & open this in your favourite code/text editor eg VSCode or vim
2. In this file write the following:
```nextflow
// main.nf
params.reads = false

println "My reads: ${params.reads}"
```

The first line initialises a new variable (`params.reads`) & sets it to `false`
The second line prints the value of this variable on execution of the pipeline.

We can now run this script & set the value of `params.reads` to one of our FASTQ files in the testdata folder with the following command:
```
nextflow run main.nf --reads testdata/test.20k_reads_1.fastq.gz
```

This should return the value you passed on the command line

#### Recap
Here we learnt how to define parameters & pass command line arguments to them in Nextflow

### c) Processes (inputs, outputs & scripts)

Nextflow allows the execution of any command or user script by using a `process` definition. 

A process is defined by providing three main declarations: 
the process [inputs](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#inputs), 
the process [outputs](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#outputs)
and finally the command [script](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#script).

In our main script we want to add the following:
```nextflow
//mainf.nf
reads = file(params.reads)

process fastqc {

    publishDir "results", mode: 'copy'

    input:
    file(reads) from reads

    output:
    file "*_fastqc.{zip,html}" into fastqc_results

    script:
    """
    fastqc $reads
    """
}
```

Here we created the variable `reads` which is a `file` from the command line input.

We can then create the process `fastqc` including:
 - the [directive](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#directives) `publishDir` to specify which folder to copy the output files to 
 - the [inputs](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#inputs) where we declare a `file` `reads` from our variable `reads`
 - the [output](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#outputs) which is anything ending in `_fastqc.zip` or `_fastqc.html` which will go into a `fastqc_results` channel
 - the [script](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#script) where we are running the `fastqc` command on our `reads` variable
 
We can then run our script with the following command:
```bash
nextflow run main.nf --reads testdata/test.20k_reads_1.fastq.gz -with-docker flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1
```

By running Nextflow using the `with-docker` flag we can specify a Docker container to execute this command in. This is beneficial because it means we do not need to have `fastqc` installed locally on our laptop. We just need to specify a Docker container that has `fastqc` installed.


### d) Channels

Channels are the preferred method of transferring data in Nextflow & can connect two processes or operators.

<!--
There are two types of channels:
1. [Queue channels](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#queue-channel) can be used to connect two processes or operators. They are usually produced from factory methods such as [`from`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#from)/[`fromPath`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#frompath) or by chaining it with methods such as [`map`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operator-map). **Queue channels are consumed upon being read.**
2. [Value channels](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#value-channel) a.k.a. singleton channel are bound to a single value and can be read unlimited times without consuming there content. Value channels are produced by the value factory method or by operators returning a single value, such us first, last, collect, count, min, max, reduce, sum.
-->

Here we will use the method [`fromFilePairs`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs) to create a channel to load paired end FASTQ data, rather than just a single FASTQ file.

To do this we will replace the code from [1c](https://github.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/blob/master/README.md#c-processes-inputs-outputs--scripts) with the following 

```nextflow
//main.nf
reads = Channel.fromFilePairs(params.reads, size: 2)

process fastqc {

    tag "$name"
    publishDir "results", mode: 'copy'
    container 'flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1'

    input:
    set val(name), file(reads) from reads

    output:
    file "*_fastqc.{zip,html}" into fastqc_results

    script:
    """
    fastqc $reads
    """
}
```

The `reads` variable is now equal to a channel which contains the reads prefix & paired end FASTQ data. Therefore, the input declaration has also changed to reflect this by declaring the value `name`. This `name` can be used as a tag for when the pipeline is run. Also as we are now declaring two inputs the `set` keyword also has to be used. Finally we can also specify the container name within the processes as a directive.

To run the pipeline:
```bash
nextflow run main.nf --reads "testdata/test.20k_reads_{1,2}.fastq.gz" -with-docker flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1
```

#### Recap
Here we learnt how to the [`fromFilePairs`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs) method to generate a channel for our input data.

### e) Operators

Operators are methods that allow you to manipulate & connect channels.

Here we will add a new process `multiqc` & use the [`.collect()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#collect) operator

Replace the fastqc process with the following:
```nextflow
process fastqc {

    tag "$name"
    publishDir "results", mode: 'copy'
    container 'flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1'

    input:
    set val(name), file(reads) from reads

    output:
    file "*_fastqc.{zip,html}" into fastqc_results

    script:
    """
    fastqc $reads
    """
}

process multiqc {

    publishDir "results", mode: 'copy'
    container 'ewels/multiqc:v1.7'

    input:
    file (fastqc:'fastqc/*') from fastqc_results.collect()

    output:
    file "*multiqc_report.html" into multiqc_report
    file "*_data"

    script:
    """
    multiqc . -m fastqc
    """
}
```

Here we have added another process `multiqc`. We have used the `collect` operator here so that if `fastqc` ran for more than two pairs of files `multiqc` would collect & run once for all the files.

The pipeline can be run with the follwing:
```bash
nextflow run main.nf --reads "testdata/test.20k_reads_{1,2}.fastq.gz" -with-docker flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1
```

### e) Configuration

Add parameters, docker & memory etc to `nextflow.config`

<br />

## Session 2: Docker

![docker logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/docker.gif)

Why use Docker? **\<Insert reproducibility meme here\>**
[See about Docker slides]()


### a) Running images

Docker run command

### b) Dockerfiles

How to write a Dockerfile. From nf-core. Install fastqc & multiqc

### c) Building images

Docker build command & run interactively


### d) BONUS: Pushing to DockerHub

What is DockerHub? How to create an account on DockerHub, log in on the CLI & push to DockerHub.

<br />

## Session 3: FlowCraft

![flowcraft logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/flowcraft.png)

What is FlowCraft? Why use it? 
[See FlowCraft slides](https://slides.com/diogosilva-1/nextflow-workshop-2018-6#/)

### a) Installation
```bash
git clone https://github.com/assemblerflow/flowcraft.git
cd flowcraft
python3 setup.py install
```

### b) How to build a FlowCraft Component
### i. Templates
### ii. Classes

### c) Building a pipeline with FlowCraft
```bash
flowcraft.py build -t "fastqc bwa mark_duplicates haplotypecaller" -o gatk.nf --merge-params
```

<br />

## Session 4: Running Nextflow Pipelines on The Cloud on Deploit

![deploit logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/deploit.png)

About [Deploit](https://lifebit.ai/deploit)

### a) Creating an account
### b) Running a pipeline
### c) Importing a Nextflow pipeline on Deploit

Commit message:

Removed fastqc & added recap for operators

README.md, after:

# London Bioinformatics Frontiers Hackathon Tutorial
Tutorial for The [London Bioinformatics Frontiers](http://bioinformatics-frontiers.com) Hackathon 2019.

![lbf_banner](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/lbf_banner.png)

Intro to:
- [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) - framework for building paralleisable & scalable computational pipelines
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) - tool to create, deploy, and run applications by using containers which bundle dependencies
- [FlowCraft](https://flowcraft.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) - modular, extensible and flexible tool to build, monitor and report nextflow pipelines
- [Deploit](https://lifebit.ai/deploit) - cloud based platform to run Nextflow data analyses & data management

## Prerequisites
The following are required for the hackathon:
- Java 8 or later
- Docker engine 1.10.x (or higher)
- Git
- Python3

*If you have them installed that's great! Don't worry if not we will help you to install them & other software throughout the tutorial*

<br />

## Session 1: Nextflow

![nextflow_logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/nextflow.png)

What is Nextflow? Why use it? [See about Nextflow slides]()

During the first session you will build a [FastQC](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) & [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/)   pipeline to learn the basics of Nextflow including:
- [Parameters](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/getstarted.html?highlight=parameters#pipeline-parameters)
- [Processes](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html) (inputs, outputs & scripts)
- [Channels](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html)
- [Operators](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html)
- [Configuration](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/config.html)


### a) Installation
### i. Installing Nextflow
You will need to have Java 8 or later installed for Nextflow to work. You can check your version of Java by entering the following command:
```bash
java -version
```

To install Nextflow open a terminal & enter the following command:
```bash
curl -fsSL get.nextflow.io | bash
```

This will create a `nextflow` executable file in your current directory. To complete the installation so that you can run Nextflow run anywhere you may want to add it a directory in your $PATH, eg:
```
mv nextflow /usr/local/bin
```

You can then test your installation of Nextflow with:
```
nextflow run hello
```

### ii. Installing Docker

To check if you have docker installed you can type:
```bash
docker -v
```

If you need to install docker you can do so by following the instructions [here](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/). Be sure to select your correct OS:
[![install_docker](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/install_docker.png)](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/)

  
### b) Parameters

Now that we have Nextflow & Docker installed we're ready to run our first script

1. Create a file `main.nf` & open this in your favourite code/text editor eg VSCode or vim
2. In this file write the following:
```nextflow
// main.nf
params.reads = false

println "My reads: ${params.reads}"
```

The first line initialises a new variable (`params.reads`) & sets it to `false`
The second line prints the value of this variable on execution of the pipeline.

We can now run this script & set the value of `params.reads` to one of our FASTQ files in the testdata folder with the following command:
```
nextflow run main.nf --reads testdata/test.20k_reads_1.fastq.gz
```

This should return the value you passed on the command line

#### Recap
Here we learnt how to define parameters & pass command line arguments to them in Nextflow

### c) Processes (inputs, outputs & scripts)

Nextflow allows the execution of any command or user script by using a `process` definition. 

A process is defined by providing three main declarations: 
the process [inputs](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#inputs), 
the process [outputs](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#outputs)
and finally the command [script](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#script).

In our main script we want to add the following:
```nextflow
//mainf.nf
reads = file(params.reads)

process fastqc {

    publishDir "results", mode: 'copy'

    input:
    file(reads) from reads

    output:
    file "*_fastqc.{zip,html}" into fastqc_results

    script:
    """
    fastqc $reads
    """
}
```

Here we created the variable `reads` which is a `file` from the command line input.

We can then create the process `fastqc` including:
 - the [directive](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#directives) `publishDir` to specify which folder to copy the output files to 
 - the [inputs](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#inputs) where we declare a `file` `reads` from our variable `reads`
 - the [output](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#outputs) which is anything ending in `_fastqc.zip` or `_fastqc.html` which will go into a `fastqc_results` channel
 - the [script](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#script) where we are running the `fastqc` command on our `reads` variable
 
We can then run our script with the following command:
```bash
nextflow run main.nf --reads testdata/test.20k_reads_1.fastq.gz -with-docker flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1
```

By running Nextflow using the `with-docker` flag we can specify a Docker container to execute this command in. This is beneficial because it means we do not need to have `fastqc` installed locally on our laptop. We just need to specify a Docker container that has `fastqc` installed.


### d) Channels

Channels are the preferred method of transferring data in Nextflow & can connect two processes or operators.

<!--
There are two types of channels:
1. [Queue channels](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#queue-channel) can be used to connect two processes or operators. They are usually produced from factory methods such as [`from`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#from)/[`fromPath`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#frompath) or by chaining it with methods such as [`map`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operator-map). **Queue channels are consumed upon being read.**
2. [Value channels](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#value-channel) a.k.a. singleton channel are bound to a single value and can be read unlimited times without consuming there content. Value channels are produced by the value factory method or by operators returning a single value, such us first, last, collect, count, min, max, reduce, sum.
-->

Here we will use the method [`fromFilePairs`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs) to create a channel to load paired end FASTQ data, rather than just a single FASTQ file.

To do this we will replace the code from [1c](https://github.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/blob/master/README.md#c-processes-inputs-outputs--scripts) with the following 

```nextflow
//main.nf
reads = Channel.fromFilePairs(params.reads, size: 2)

process fastqc {

    tag "$name"
    publishDir "results", mode: 'copy'
    container 'flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1'

    input:
    set val(name), file(reads) from reads

    output:
    file "*_fastqc.{zip,html}" into fastqc_results

    script:
    """
    fastqc $reads
    """
}
```

The `reads` variable is now equal to a channel which contains the reads prefix & paired end FASTQ data. Therefore, the input declaration has also changed to reflect this by declaring the value `name`. This `name` can be used as a tag for when the pipeline is run. Also as we are now declaring two inputs the `set` keyword also has to be used. Finally we can also specify the container name within the processes as a directive.

To run the pipeline:
```bash
nextflow run main.nf --reads "testdata/test.20k_reads_{1,2}.fastq.gz" -with-docker flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1
```

#### Recap
Here we learnt how to the [`fromFilePairs`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs) method to generate a channel for our input data.

### e) Operators

Operators are methods that allow you to manipulate & connect channels.

Here we will add a new process `multiqc` & use the [`.collect()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#collect) operator

Replace the fastqc process with the following:
```nextflow
process multiqc {

    publishDir "results", mode: 'copy'
    container 'ewels/multiqc:v1.7'

    input:
    file (fastqc:'fastqc/*') from fastqc_results.collect()

    output:
    file "*multiqc_report.html" into multiqc_report
    file "*_data"

    script:
    """
    multiqc . -m fastqc
    """
}
```

Here we have added another process `multiqc`. We have used the `collect` operator here so that if `fastqc` ran for more than two pairs of files `multiqc` would collect & run once for all the files.

The pipeline can be run with the follwing:
```bash
nextflow run main.nf --reads "testdata/test.20k_reads_{1,2}.fastq.gz" -with-docker flowcraft/fastqc:0.11.7-1
```

#### Recap
Here we learnt how to use operators such as `collect`

### f) Configuration

Add parameters, docker & memory etc to `nextflow.config`

<br />

## Session 2: Docker

![docker logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/docker.gif)

Why use Docker? **\<Insert reproducibility meme here\>**
[See about Docker slides]()


### a) Running images

Docker run command

### b) Dockerfiles

How to write a Dockerfile. From nf-core. Install fastqc & multiqc

### c) Building images

Docker build command & run interactively


### d) BONUS: Pushing to DockerHub

What is DockerHub? How to create an account on DockerHub, log in on the CLI & push to DockerHub.

<br />

## Session 3: FlowCraft

![flowcraft logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/flowcraft.png)

What is FlowCraft? Why use it? 
[See FlowCraft slides](https://slides.com/diogosilva-1/nextflow-workshop-2018-6#/)

### a) Installation
```bash
git clone https://github.com/assemblerflow/flowcraft.git
cd flowcraft
python3 setup.py install
```

### b) How to build a FlowCraft Component
### i. Templates
### ii. Classes

### c) Building a pipeline with FlowCraft
```bash
flowcraft.py build -t "fastqc bwa mark_duplicates haplotypecaller" -o gatk.nf --merge-params
```

<br />

## Session 4: Running Nextflow Pipelines on The Cloud on Deploit

![deploit logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/PhilPalmer/lbf-hack-tutorial/master/images/deploit.png)

About [Deploit](https://lifebit.ai/deploit)

### a) Creating an account
### b) Running a pipeline
### c) Importing a Nextflow pipeline on Deploit
